Good morning.
My name is Chris Parker.
I work in the Cocoa frameworks team,
and I'm glad you could all join
me here at 9 in the morning
for What's New in Cocoa.
So let's get started.
We have a number of new things going on.
We've made a lot of changes for 64-bit
and for resolution independence,
so you heard Simon Patience
and Peter Graffagnino talk
about those yesterday.
We have a lot of new behaviors
for existing API as usual,
a bunch of new API and some new
controls and things like that that
we're going to show you today.
So let's start with some
discussion about 64-bit.
Simon told everybody
yesterday that in Tiger,
all the lower level system
libraries were 64-bit,
and now in Leopard we're moving up.
So the frameworks now
are going to be 64-bit,
and we've made some changes
throughout Foundation and
the kit to facilitate this.
So we've updated our
collections in 64-bit.
They can hold many more objects.
We've added some new types and new
methods to deal with the wider word size,
and we've also provided some
conversion scripts for you.
So if you look around in
your developer folder,
you'll find some scripts to do some
conversion of types and methods.
You'll also find some
verifier for NSCoders,
so we're going to try and help you
get your archiving right in both
the 32-bit and the 64-bit world.
We've also removed some
classes in the kit.
And sometimes we'll have to
do some work on the code,
but we're going to try and help you
get your archiving right in both
the 32-bit and the 64-bit world.
So we've pulled out NS Menu View.
We've pulled out
NS Movie and NS Movie View,
and those have been deprecated in favor
of the 64-bit stuff that's in QtKit.
QuickDraw, you saw yesterday,
QuickDraw has been completely deprecated,
so NS QuickDraw View is gone.
And NS, the Simple Horizontal Typesetter,
that's been deprecated
for a little while.
We're actually pulling that out
of the kit in 64-bit as well.
And the new typesetter APIs are
what you should be looking at.
We've taken individual methods
here and there out for 64-bit.
We've taken advantage of this
opportunity for binary compatibility to
be able to pull some of that stuff out.
So some deprecated methods are gone.
We've also made a lot of changes
for resolution independence.
The work started in
Tiger for developer testing,
so when you fire up
Quartz Debug in Leopard,
you'll be able to see some new behaviors.
Most of the standard controls
now draw in high res,
so when you scale your
UI up at 1.5x or 2x,
there'll be a nice crisp button.
There'll be good crisp text in the menus.
And outlines for all the controls.
We've worked on a lot of
the standard images now are
available in high resolution,
so if you ask for a named image,
you're going to get a nice big scalable
image that will get displayed correctly.
We've addressed a lot of the problems
with non-integral scaling that we had.
Scrolling now works a whole lot
better when you're scrolling in views.
And some of the table view
stuff has been fixed for row
alignment in high resolution.
So there are a lot of other changes here.
They're all in the release notes.
I could talk for a long time about this.
But we do have a few other
talks for you to go to for this.
So right here in this room at 10:30,
the Taking Advantage of
Leopard features in Cocoa talk.
And in the marina later
today is a 64-bit overview.
And those two talks will cover
a lot of the stuff in more
detail here than I can here.
So let's just get started right
with the stuff in the app kit.
You saw Peter Graffagnino talk
about the cinematic experience.
And part of that is using core animation.
What we're doing is we're going to
incorporate a lot of these core animation
capabilities directly into the app kit.
So NSView subtrees can be automatically
mirrored into the core animation layers.
So if you've been looking at the
core animation API on Leopard,
you'll see that there's this idea
of a layer that each view will have.
And we're also adopting the implied
animation model that's there.
So you'll be able to do some very
similar things where you set an
attribute and just have it happen.
This also means that we can add new
appearance attributes to NSView.
So there will be some new
things you can do with views.
And it's all to make
animation easier in Cocoa.
So we don't like writing lots of
code any more than you guys do.
So we're going to try and compress
down how much code everybody
has to write to get really good
eye-popping animations into this.
So the way you turn on the layers for
a view is you call set wants layer yes.
And that takes the entire
view subtree and makes it core
animation capable effectively.
So we've introduced this idea of
an animator proxy for the object.
So before if you called
set frame on a view,
it would happen automatically.
Now what you'll do is you'll
ask for the view's animator and
then call set frame on that.
And that makes it happen using
the core animation effects.
If you need to do longer
durations than the default,
or if you want to group multiple
things into a single animation effect,
you'll use an NSAnimationContext.
This is a similar idea
to an NSGraphicsContext.
You begin a grouping,
in the current context
you set the duration,
and then you do things
like set the frame.
And then when you call end grouping,
that touches off the animation.
The new NSView properties,
things like the layers
are an obvious property,
but this will include
things like alpha value,
the view, the shadows, compositing,
origin, frame, the bounds,
all of that stuff is all controllable
by this new animator proxy idea.
And again, I could talk for a long time,
but we have a Cocoa Animation Techniques
talk in Knob Hill on Wednesday.
And if you'd like to learn more
about using the Core Animation stuff
in Cocoa and how all this
stuff works just by turning
on the LayerKit stuff in Cocoa,
that's where you should go.
And I'm going to ask
Doug Davidson to come up,
and he's going to talk about
some stuff that we've been
working on for Cocoa Text.
Thank you, Chris.
Let me just go over to
the demo machine here.
Now, from time to time over
the last few years,
people would come up
to me and they'd say,
"Now, the Cocoa Tech system is great,
but why does it slow down
so much when I try to load
in my 50 megabyte log file?"
I have to say, well, you know,
it's not really designed for that.
And some of them will say,
so redesign it.
That would take a long time.
Well, for Leopard, we've had a long time.
And anything over a year is a
long time for an OS release,
don't you think?
: Hello, everyone.
I'm Chris Parker,
and I'm going to talk about the new
features in the Cocoa framework.
This talk provides an overview of new
features and important changes introduced
in the Cocoa frameworks in Leopard.
Learn about the exciting
developments in AppKit,
Core Data, Foundation,
and other related frameworks on Mac OS X,
and get pointers to other sessions
that cover the changes in more detail.
Learn about the exciting
developments in AppKit,
Core Data, Foundation,
and other related frameworks on Mac OS X,
and get pointers to other sessions
that cover the changes in more detail.
So let's go back to the slides.
And let me talk about what we've
done to make this possible.
Well, first of all,
we've rewritten a large
chunk of the text system.
More important for you,
we've added a new option
to NSLayoutManager called
non-contiguous layout.
What this does is it means
that when it's turned on,
any portion of the
document can be laid out,
regardless of whether previous portions
have been laid out previously or not.
And as you can see,
this does have significant performance
benefits for large documents.
However, this is an option.
It's not on by default.
You have to turn it on.
The reason is that it also produces
some significant behavioral changes
to the NSLayoutManager APIs.
Now, if you are using
NSLayoutManager only indirectly,
say via NSTextView,
then you can probably just turn
it on without any problems.
If you are using
NSLayoutManager directly,
however,
you probably will have to do some work to
modify your code in order to adopt this.
For TextEdit,
I think it was just a one-line change.
When Xcode adopted this,
they had to do significantly more work,
but not too bad, I think.
Now along with this comes some
new NSLayoutManager methods.
Of course,
there's a flag to turn it on or off.
And because of these behavioral changes,
we also have some new methods that
allow you to explicitly specify and
force glyph generation or layout for
specific portions of the document.
We've also taken this opportunity
to do some cleanup on our API to
fill in some holes and add some
new methods to make things simpler.
For the details of the new
methods and behavioral changes,
go to the AppKit release notes and
look at the NSLayoutManager header.
It's all specified there.
So what else do we have for you?
Well, as you know,
the Cocoa Tech System imports and
exports a variety of document formats,
HTML, Word doc format, and so forth.
There's been a lot of talk recently
about some new document formats.
So I'm pleased to be able
to say that in Leopard,
the Cocoa Tech System will
import and export both the Oasis
Open Document format used by
OpenOffice 2 and the ECMA Office 2.
There's also the Office Open XML format
used by Office 2007.
The support for this is on the
system that you've received.
It is currently still
somewhat preliminary.
In the case of Office OpenXML,
necessarily so because the
standard is not yet finalized.
And also there's an important caveat,
and that is that the Office 2007
betas don't use a standard format,
they use a non-standard variant.
We can handle it, but anyway,
the details for this are
also in the release notes.
You can take a look at that.
And you can try this out in TextEdit,
a system you have.
What else is on the
system you've received?
We have a number of smaller
additions to the tech system APIs.
A number of people have asked for
more control over the spell checker,
and in particular over the dotted
underlined misspelling indicator,
where it gets shown,
and we've added that for you.
We have a number of new methods
for controlling temporary
attributes on the layout manager.
And the layout manager has a new
method to make it much easier to get
access to insertion points in the text,
in particular to get bulk
access to many at once.
And there are a number of other new
bulk methods from the layout manager.
Text views now have tool tips
for links to automatically show
the destination of the link.
And a lot more.
Take a look at the
Reese notes again for details.
Chris Parker, Doug Davidson
In addition,
there are some new features that are
not enabled on the C that you have
that are planned for levered final.
Among these are grammar checking
to go along with spell checking,
inline editing of
images attached in text,
courtesy of ImageKit, smart quotes,
automatic conversion of
straight quotes to curly quotes,
and automatic detection of
URLs and text conversion to links.
All of these, of course,
on an opt-in basis.
There is one more thing I want
to mention that's not perhaps
directly relevant to Cocoa,
and that is that there is a new
public framework in Leopard at
the Carbon level called Core Text.
This was private in Tiger,
now public in Leopard.
This is essentially a modern
replacement for Atsui,
and it provides very low-level
line layout information.
The Cocoa text system has been
using it to get its low-level
line information since Tiger.
Probably most of you will never need to
use it because you have Cocoa APIs like
NSLayoutManager to get this information.
But if you've ever had
occasion to use Atsui,
you should take a look at Core Text.
It's a lot easier to use.
For starters,
it's based on attributed strings,
just like the Cocoa text system.
And there is a talk on this,
I believe it's on Thursday.
And now I'd like to bring Chris back
up to continue talking about AppKit.
Thank you, Doug.
We've got some new controls and
some new behaviors in the kit,
and since Doug started out with a demo,
I thought I would also.
So, one of the things that
we've been working on here,
if I could have this demo machine,
please, is...
I'm trying to improve some of the
things about the menuing system.
So here I have just an
application that you might whip
together in Interface Builder.
It has a help menu.
We see that the search menu
is automatically in there.
You know, the window menu,
the normal stuff.
Let me go down here to the
application menu and if we look
at this "What's This?" menu,
we've made a few changes.
You can now put arbitrary
views in NS Menu items.
On the top here there's a
garden variety text view.
We have a button and an indeterminate
progress indicator and a circular
slider there at the far right.
That spinning put any crazy view is a Qt,
is a Quartz Composer composition.
And this last view down here,
well you can, oh, I moved away.
There we go.
You can actually,
I'm going to show you a little bit of a
I played this for hours for a while.
This was just great.
So that's what we've done for menus.
If I could have the slides back, please.
I'm on NS Menu Item,
and the way you do this is you
basically set up your view the way
you'd like and call setView on it.
There's no step three, right?
It's create your view, call set view,
you're done.
Menu items with views don't do things
like draw their title or state,
so everything gets assigned
to your view for drawing.
You'll get mouse events and
things like that normally,
but you won't necessarily be
able to get keyboard events,
right?
So we're tracking the menu
for keyboard equivalents,
but not directly in the view.
So there are a few restrictions,
but you should be able to play
with it and figure out exactly
what you'll be able to do.
We've added some new delegate
methods to NS Menu also,
so when you're mousing over the menus,
you'll be able to get more information
about what the user's doing.
You'll get a delegate callback.
Menu will open just before it pops open.
Menu did close.
It will highlight item as the user
scrolls through it just before that
highlight comes up on the menu item.
We've also introduced a new
class called NS Rule Editor.
So you've seen males rules filter.
You set up slices that
match various... Criteria,
and then the rules are filtered here.
We've added this directly to the kit.
So it supports nesting of rules.
It's a delegate-based API,
so you'll assign a delegate to it,
and then this control will
ask your delegate about what
it should be displaying.
It's also bindings compatible,
so you should be able to just wire one
of these things right up and bind to
your controller object directly in IB.
If it's something that it
can generate a predicate for,
it will do so.
So you can actually get NS predicates
automatically out of this thing.
And it's fully localizable,
so all of the things that you see
in a rule editor can be completely
localized through a clever plist
mechanism that we've set up.
So this is what it looks like.
All right, so this particular one
is a compound rule.
Any of the following are true,
and the name would contain an image,
and the kind is of any
image that's of type TIF.
And this has the same plus and
minus buttons on the far side,
so you can add and remove slices,
and you'll be able to
completely configure this.
So NS Rule Editor is now
available for you in this.
the kid.
So there's a special subclass to this.
We figure that people are going to be
doing a lot of things with filtering of,
for instance,
their core data applications
and stuff like that.
So we've added NSPredicateEditor as
a special subclass of NSRuleEditor.
So rows get populated directly
from its object value,
and the control's object value for a
predicate editor is an NSPredicate.
So there's a helper class called
NSPredicateEditorRowTemplate,
and that maps between the elements of
the predicate and the things that are
displayed in the predicate editor.
And this is completely configurable also
programmatically or in Interface Builder.
So if you've looked at
the new Interface Builder,
there's a control in the library there
that's one of these rule editors.
And it uses target action to
talk about all the changes.
So this will go right
up the responder chain,
if you like, also.
We've been spending a lot of time
also on TableView and OutlineView.
And there's some new
features available in there.
Type to select now.
If you've got your
TableView set up and you type.
You can type to select.
The disabled state now works
as the way you'd expect.
There's also some new APIs for
hit testing and tracking,
so you'll get better control in
the table view and the outline
view of what's happening in your
sliders and things like that,
and a new full width look,
and that looks like this.
Right, so the full width look here
goes all the way across.
You see that favorite things
group is a full width cell
that goes all the way across,
and you don't see the check
boxes and things like that.
I typed to select Kosh here,
and we've got some
Other controls in there that
we'll see what we can do with
some API for those in a minute.
You can control cell tracking now.
So if you return a no from this method,
outline view should track
cell for table column item,
that actually turns off tracking
for that particular thing.
If you return yes from this,
now you can actually track
independently of item selection.
And so the combination of this and some
other API allows you to be able to grab
a slider that's in a cell in a row,
and it doesn't change the
selection of the table view.
So there's some behaviors here
now that you can change without
having to do too much subclassing.
We've also added NSPathControl.
And this easily allows you to
represent a path and its components.
There are three different styles,
the standard path style,
the navbar style, and a popup style.
And you can also filter the
permitted types in this.
And I actually have a demo of this also,
if I could have the
demo machine back here.
So here's the path control demo.
And this is the pop-up flavor here,
where if I click on the
temperature converter menu,
this pops up the regular demo.
This is a list here of the path
that it takes to get there.
All of the display icons are correct.
This will be localized into the
user's system folders localization.
You can choose different folders here.
You can turn this menu off if you like.
The standard look is a
little more interesting.
You've probably seen this
directly in the finder.
As I resize this,
the path elements shrink.
And if I get it really small here
and start mousing over these things,
it will do the same animations.
So Navbar style, this may look familiar
to you a little bit.
It has the same look
that the iTunes one does,
right?
So this has the same behaviors
as I mouse over things.
They expand.
As I make it bigger, it resizes.
And these are all set up to
do things like drag elements
out directly as a drag source,
and they can also accept
Oh, that wacky Mighty Mouse.
You can also accept drags and just drag
something into it and it automatically
will grab the path from that.
So that's the path control,
the new path control in Leopard.
Again, I could spend a lot of
time talking about this.
We have another talk about it,
Beyond Buttons and Sliders,
right here tomorrow morning at 10:30,
where a lot of these controls will
be talked about and some other stuff
in TableView and things like that.
So please come by if you'd
like to learn more about that.
We've added support for
drawing gradients in the kit.
So being able to have a color
gradient with multiple color stops.
These are linear or radial,
so you can draw off a radius if you want.
And it was colors at
locations color space.
So you give us an array of colors,
and then locations is an array
of CG floats from 0 to 1,
0.0 to 1.0,
and those represent the inflection
points for the color stops.
And you can draw linear gradients or
radial gradients and that interesting
one there is drawing Bezier Path Angle,
and that looks like this.
So if you've set up a Bezier Path with
a bunch of disconnected elements,
you can tell it to draw the gradient
underneath it and it takes care of
doing all that clipping for you.
So some of the work you may
have been doing to do this
is now right in NSGradient.
So that's a really
boring screenshot I know.
So we've set up new
stuff for tracking areas.
So you may remember in Tiger we've
got some ways to do mouse tracking.
We've set up a new model for this,
and this takes some of what we do
today in Tracking Rects already and
then adds some new properties to it.
So initWithRectOptionsOwnerUserInfo,
this guy will set up a tracking area
for you and you can decide whether you
want a tracking area for this or not.
You can decide whether you want mouse
entered and exited events or mouse
moved events and also cursor updates.
And those are all passed in as options.
You can also specify when
the tracking area is active.
Only when the app is the first
responder or when it's a key window,
when it's in the active app
or if it's always tracking.
And there's some additional behavior.
You can start out inside
and things like that,
but the really big one is
this invisible rect one.
And that will take care of... So you
set up some tracking areas and you
scroll those tracking areas off
of your view using a scroll view.
It will take care of automatically
disabling those tracking areas for you.
And then when they come
back into the visible area,
we'll re-enable them automatically.
So all this code that you guys
have been writing goes away.
We've also added full
screen mode to NSView.
So if you saw one of the demos yesterday,
Andres, hit a button and the thing went
into total full screen mode.
That's this API:
enter full screen mode with options,
exit full screen mode with
options and whether or not the
view is in the full screen mode.
And you can set up animations for this
to be able to do transitions from the
windowed mode into full screen mode.
You can opt into it for all
settings and things like that.
This is a really powerful but really
simple API to get that kind of effect.
And we're really happy to
be able to add that also.
Andres' demo,
you may have seen it with the picture
browser using a thing called GridView.
And there is a class in the kit now for
that and that's bindings compatible.
It uses NSViews and the NSView has
a class called GridView.
And it's a core animation behavior
that we've seen for core animation.
And this thing can be completely
wired up in interface builder.
So you'll set up a small prototype view,
wire it up to your controller,
hook the thing up to the GridView,
and it takes care of laying these
things out and filling out each
of those views as it draws them.
And it also takes care of layout
as you expand and contract.
We made a lot of changes for
uniform type identifiers in the kit.
So there's new support for NSDocument,
NSDocumentController,
the OpenPanel and SafePanel, Workspace,
Pasteboard.
All of these classes now have much
better support for UTIs in Leopard.
And there are some other
sessions about this.
Unfortunately,
I don't have the information,
but there's a lot of information,
a lot of information in the release notes
on this about how to use it and how the
filtering works and things like that.
And we're really encouraging people
to use UTIs because they work really
well with Spotlight and a bunch of
other technologies on our system.
So we're going to move
down now into Foundation,
and with all of these new
machines that are coming out
with all kinds of processors,
it's a little more interesting to be able
to find out how many are in the machine.
We've added to NSProcessInfo
the processor count method,
and you'll see this type NSUInteger.
This is a cover type for us.
It's 32 bits and 32 bits
and 64 bits in 64-bit,
and this allows us to be able to write
the same code in both 32-bit and 64-bit.
This processor count method
returns the number of processors
that are in the machine.
So in 64-bit,
we had a lot of room for lots of
processors to come up eventually.
How many active processors?
You can turn processors on and off.
Most of our users don't do this,
but sometimes it's handy to be able
to test things in a uniprocessor
or multiprocessor environment,
and that's the active processor count.
So we've put those on NSProcessInfo.
But with all of these processors
that are now in the machine,
we do want to help you guys
take the best advantage.
So we're adding some
new methods to NSThread.
Some methods to find the main thread.
This class method for isMainThread
tells you whether or not the thread
you're running in is the main thread.
You can get a reference
to the main thread.
There's an instance method now
that also tells you whether the
instance you have is the main thread.
And you can set the stack
size of the thread now.
So if you need a thread with
a much bigger stack size,
you're able to do that just before
you touch the thread execution off.
And you can also initialize
the thread without starting it.
So sometimes it's handy to be
able to initialize these things,
but not touch the
operation off until later.
And that's what this init and
initWithTargetSelectorObject do.
And those help us do some other things.
You can control thread execution now.
We've added some new API to tell
you whether or not a thread is
executing or whether it's finished,
whether it's cancelled,
and then cancelStart and main here.
And these are some new methods
to really try and help you
parallelize what you're doing.
So you override main to
do most of your work.
And then you guys will have to maintain
the isExecuting and isFinished state.
Cancel is an advisory state.
So what will happen is somebody will
call cancel on your NSThread instance.
And then your main will check to see
whether or not cancel has been called.
And then you can elect whether you're
going to exit by returning or throwing
an exception or however you're going
to get out of this particular method.
This is not the same.
If you're familiar with the
POSIX PthreadCancellation idea,
this is not the same as that.
Right?
You can't cancel a Pthread out from under
us and expect things to work that way.
So Foundation and Cocoa don't support
the POSIX PthreadCancellation model.
We now have a method to execute
stuff on a specific thread.
So earlier we introduced
perform select our main thread.
This is now perform on any thread.
So if you have a thread instance,
you can tell it to do something.
PerformSelectorOnThreadWithObject.
So now PerformSelectorOnMainThread
is really just a special
case of this method for us.
And we've also provided a convenience.
You can run a single method
in a background thread.
So PerformSelectorOnBackgroundWithObject,
that just fires off a thread,
does the selector with that object,
and ends.
So you can fire off a
thread really easily.
This is now perform on any thread.
So if you have a thread instance,
you can tell it to do something.
PerformSelectorOnThreadWithObject.
So now PerformSelectorOnMainThread
is really just a special
case of this method for us.
And we've also provided a convenience.
You can run a single method
in a background thread.
So PerformSelectorOnBackgroundWithObject,
that just fires off a thread,
does the selector with that object,
and ends.
So you can fire off a
thread really easily.
And this operation talked
about dependencies.
So I'm going to talk about
dependencies a little bit.
You can add an operation as a dependency
of another operation or remove it.
You can find out what
the dependencies are.
There's some other state you can find
out about whether or not it's ready.
An operation is ready if all of its
dependencies have fired off and are done.
And operations can have priorities.
So you can set the priority
on a particular operation.
And then when you put it
into an operation queue,
the queue is going to take care of
managing all those things automatically.
Right?
So the NSOperationQueue is pretty simple.
You just add an operation to it.
And then it takes care
of when it's got time,
it's going to go off and fire
off-- it might fire off a thread,
it might not.
It's going to just take care of executing
all the operations that you put in
it in priority order automatically.
So you can also cancel
all the operations,
hang around until the
operations are finished,
and change the concurrent
operation count.
So we try to pick a sane default
based on what the machine
configuration looks like.
But if you discover through your own
profiling that you need to change that,
this is the API you'd use.
So this gives you an easy way to be able
to encapsulate all that threading stuff
and really take advantage of the extra
processors that are now in our machines.
Here is a multi-threading in Cocoa talk.
So if you'd like to
learn more about this,
there will be some demos and more
explanation about what's going
on here tomorrow at 5:00 PM.
So that'll be a good one to go to
if you're having a lot of threading
things going on in your application.
We've added NS condition.
Well, sort of added.
This is a Pthread style
condition variable.
So NSConditionLock has the test
directly in the condition lock.
This actually moves
it outside the object.
So you'll typically take the lock,
hang around while the test is true,
and then do your work and signal
when you're done and unlock it.
And this actually shows up
in the headers in Leopard,
but it's been around since 10.0.
So you'll be able to use
this in Tiger if you need to.
You'll notice that there have been
a bunch of Objective-C changes,
and you heard about properties
and some other things,
and we'll talk a little
bit about those here,
but some of the big hitters are the
at-defs directive has been deprecated,
so you won't be able to use at-defs to
be able to get it to embed structure
information right into your code.
You'll have to interrogate
that with the API.
PoseAs has been deprecated.
The Objective-C runtime has provided
some new API to do the kinds of things
that people were doing with PoseAs,
so this will not be available as
a supported mechanism much longer.
There's new garbage collection stuff.
We'll talk a little bit about some
of the garbage collection things
that we've done in Foundation,
and some new language
features and runtime API.
There are two Objective-C talks,
one in Marina at 3.30
and then at 5 today,
so if you'd like to
learn more about that,
please do.
Here's what we've been doing
in Foundation and Cocoa,
though.
We've made a lot of
additional enhancements for
garbage collection in Cocoa,
so if you'd like to try it out,
you can just turn it
on with -f object CGC,
or you can just check the box in Xcode,
right?
So you'll be able to run
your app's garbage collected
on Leopard to try it out.
There is a class now
called NSGarbageCollector,
and if you need more information
about what the collector is doing
or being able to turn things on and
off in your app while it's running,
you can go here.
So, let's go ahead and run it.
So, this class method defaultCollector
will return nil if you're not
running garbage collected,
and it will return a default
instance of the collector if you are.
And you can turn collecting on and off,
find out if it's actually running,
you can collect if needed.
You can also disable the
collector on a per-pointer basis,
so if you know you're getting - if
you have particular semantics that
you need to fake the collector out,
you can do it with this API.
[Transcript missing]
You saw about properties, right?
So here's a person object
that's been declared with a
number of different properties,
a birthday, a first name, a last name,
and a full name.
This first property is by ref,
so that's actually holding
the direct pointer reference.
If you call the setter,
it will just replace
the pointer directly.
The second one here is a by copy.
These are actually copied in and out,
so the accessors that are synthesized
will depend on what keyword you put
there in that second slot there.
And this read-only property is
one that really has no Ivar.
It's sort of, it's set up,
you would just return the concatenation
of first name and last name,
for instance.
These are all strongly typed,
and you can also specify your own getters
and setters right here in the declaration
so that if what the runtime is doing
doesn't fit your needs or if you're
retrofitting this into existing code,
you can specify those.
Those will get called automatically.
- Enumeration,
we've made some changes for enumeration,
and one of the things that
you saw was this one here,
we have an array with
an object enumerator,
and we're doing something with it,
and this all condenses down to this.
So for item in some array.
This actually is much faster,
it turns out,
and your objects can participate in this.
It doesn't just have to
be Foundation built-in
collections that do this.
If you go ahead and
look at nsinumerator.h,
you'll see this protocol,
NSFastEnumeration.
This count by enumerating with state
objects count allows you to be able
to fill in the enumeration state.
The Objective-C enumeration
behavior will kick in,
and this reduces enumeration
overhead significantly.
So before,
while we were calling next object,
or behind the scenes,
you were calling object at index.
This gets us down to less than
one method call per object.
So if you've been seeing
in your code where your
enumeration is taking some time,
and you're spending a lot of
time on object-c message send,
this can get you out of it.
It turns out this is much, much faster.
So if you have a Tiger machine around,
you might want to compare it.
It might be a little fun.
Now that we have four-way universal
binaries and a bunch of different
architectures to have to code for,
we've added some code to
NSBundle to be able to get some more
information about what's happening.
So you can pre-flight a bundle,
and this means that the bundle machinery
is going to go and look at that bundle
and do everything right up until linking
that bundle into your executable,
and tell you whether or not something
looks like it's able to be loaded or not.
And this is pre-flight and return error,
returns an NSError by reference.
And the same thing for loading a bundle,
except that'll actually
go ahead and load it.
You can get better errors back now.
So you might have a PowerPC application,
and somebody's written an
i3d6 plugin for your app,
and you won't be able to load that in,
right?
So you want to be able to
put a meaningful error in
front of your user that says,
oh, you know,
I can't load this because it's not
the right type for this computer.
You should get a new version of
the plugin or something like that.
And those errors are all
in foundationerrors.h.
And, you know, not loadable.
Architecture mismatch,
that kind of thing.
So these are a good way to be able
to get good errors in front of
your users for bundle situations.
What architectures are in a bundle?
This just returns an NSArray.
Executable architectures
returns an NSArray.
And we've predefined some NSNumbers here
for the different architecture types.
So you can find out what's actually in
that bundle without having to go through
and use the DL open APIs and things like
that and try to walk the Mach headers.
We'll just do all that work for you.
There are some new
changes to NSPredicate.
The contains in between predicate
operators are new ways to do
comparisons in your predicates.
And there's also an optimization for
evaluating a predicate multiple times.
So if you have a single predicate
that you keep evaluating with a bunch
of different variable substitutions,
you do multiple different things,
you can use this method evaluate
with object substitution variables,
and that's going to take care of
caching everything it can to make
your predicate evaluation much faster.
NSExpression also, new expression types.
There's a subquery expression,
which allows you to not have to
multiply evaluate an expression
in order to get an answer.
The aggregate expression type, unions,
intersections, minus.
These all let Core Data generate
lots better SQL.
So if you can adopt some of these,
you may actually get better
performance out of your Core Data app.
And there's also one for using your
own functions for predicate evaluation.
So you provide a function to
the NSFunction expression type,
and you can actually do that.
You can actually set up your own
function for it to return yes
or no for the predicate stuff.
So that allows you some flexibility in
We've made some changes to
copy behavior in collections.
In Tiger, immutable collections
performed a deep copy.
We got some bugs on this
and people noticed it.
It's a problem because items
in a collection may not conform
to the NS copying protocol.
So what happens?
You try to copy one of these things
and an exception gets thrown and nuts,
now you're out of luck.
In Leopard, all the immutable collections
now shallow copy by default.
So this is a little more performant and,
oh, you filed that bug.
We've put in a link check,
and we do this a lot.
We've put in a link check for
Tiger applications to get Tiger behavior,
so we're not going to surprise any
of your apps that are running on
Leopard that were compiled on Tiger,
hopefully.
But we do want to make sure
that this gets noticed because
it may change some things.
If you were relying on code
like this to get a deep copy,
that's not going to happen anymore,
unfortunately.
NSArray deep copy,
some array copy with zone null,
now is going to do a shallow copy
when you relink your code on Leopard.
There's an easy way to fix this, though.
If you call init with
array copy items yes,
that works on both Tiger and
Leopard the same way.
So this is a drop-in replacement for that
if you were expecting deep copy behavior.
So that's the collections
copy behavior stuff.
We've also made some
changes for enumeration.
So for id item in some mutable array,
using the new for loop syntax,
we go through and find out if some
item is equal to another item,
and then we remove it
from some mutable array.
So we're enumerating the
same mutable collection that
we're removing things from.
We're mutating and enumerating
the same collection.
I was going to have Malcolm read this
because apparently he wrote this line,
but it's not safe to modify a mutable
collection while enumerating through it.
Some enumerators may currently allow
enumeration of collections modified,
but this behavior is not guaranteed
to be supported in the future.
Future is now.
For code linked on Leopard,
this will throw an exception.
Part of the fast enumeration
stuff that we did allows us to
be able to detect this condition.
So this actually helped us find
some relatively tricky bugs.
So they may be running
around in your code as well.
If you relink your code on
Leopard and you're doing this,
it will throw.
So this is much safer now.
And if your objects are participating
in the fast enumeration stuff,
it is vitally important that they don't
do any modifications themselves either.
The way to fix this, fortunately,
it's simple.
Array copy.
Just make a copy of the mutable array,
enumerate that,
and then modify the original.
Pretty easy to get out of.
Sometimes you do this and you find that
some other code was jumping off and then
coming back and modifying the original.
So it may not be quite
as obvious as this,
but it works out to be
pretty easy to chase down.
There are a number of other
frameworks that have Objective-C APIs,
and they work very well with Cocoa.
Core animation you heard about.
This is what's being used to produce all
those nice cinematic experiences that
Peter's talking about in his graphics
in the State of the Union address.
It's part of Quartz Core,
so if you're already linking Quartz Core,
you've got this available to you already.
And this is the underlying
machinery for NSVU animation.
So just like Cortex,
if you need to drop down to that because
you have really specialized needs,
you can drop down to Core animation,
but hopefully you won't have to.
Hopefully we've done all of the
heavy lifting for you for NSVUs.
And this takes care of all the
hardware and things like that
and handles text and timings,
but we do all that too.
ImageKit now is a
sub-framework of Quartz,
and that actually includes the
image browsing and choosing stuff,
and image filtering and
image filter choosing.
So the effects that you see in
things like PhotoBooth where it
displays a bunch of images and it
applies each filter and sequence,
that's what this API does.
And this also provides support for
things like slideshows and image editing.
So this will do some very basic
image editing right in your
The new publish and subscribe framework
is a new public framework in Leopard,
and this is a high-level RSS abstraction.
This is the stuff that Safari and
Mail are using to do their parsing.
And publication over the local network,
and you can subscribe to things,
and this will take care of making
sure you know when things are
updated and stuff like that.
There's also a new Calendar Store API.
So if you've been dying to get access
to iCal's calendar information,
they're providing it now in Leopard.
And this provides access to all
the account appointments and
to-dos and things like that,
and attendees for meetings that's
tied in with your address book.
Different kinds of events,
one-shot events, recurring events,
alarms, all that stuff.
So you can get direct access to that
information from Calendar Store.
Core Data has been doing
a lot of work on this.
They've done a lot of
work in the last year,
and they've introduced
APIs to do schema evolution.
So as your data set changes...
Hopefully you've specified
enough information,
but it will automatically
migrate those files over.
A new Atomic Store API,
you'll be able to write your own
Atomic Stores for Core Data to use.
So if you have your custom format,
you want to use HTML to store your stuff,
whatever it is,
as long as you can read it in and
write it out in a single thing,
new Atomic Store API.
New Predicates and Expressions,
we talked about those a little earlier.
Some improved fetching options
and better performance.
If you want to hear more about these,
there are three Core Data sessions,
and it looks like they're all right here.
Today at 5, tomorrow at 9,
and tomorrow at 2.
So if you're doing a Core Data app,
you should probably come to that also.
You also saw some of the new things in
Interface Builder 3 during the demo.
The new document view has been improved.
There's that new inspector
window with the library,
the connections heads-up display,
and a new plugin API.
And the big hitter, I think,
if you write your own
controls and things like that,
it's much easier to write plugins
now that participate in Interface
Builder and just drag them in and
out and set up your own palettes
and things like that right in IB.
So two IB sessions,
Integrating Custom Views
with Interface Builder.
That's in the Marina, Friday at 9,
and Interface Builder Techniques,
Wednesday at 5.
So if you are interested in writing
your own controls and having to
participate in Interface Builder,
here's the talk to go to.
We have a lot more information.
Sit up here and talk all week.
God, I hope not.
Derek Horn is our
Application Frameworks Evangelist.
You can reach him at Derek at Apple.com.
There's a lot of
documentation and sample code,
things like that, other resources.
Our release notes, obviously, on the DVD.
And we will be in the
AppKit Lab Thursday at 2.
That's downstairs.
I think it's on that
side of the building.
And to answer questions,
if you bring your code by,
we can take a look at that.
work through stuff.